SYNCHRONIZATION

The following are the two popular synchronization primitives:
1. Mutexes
2. Semaphores

For synchronization, two lock operations are performed: lock and unlock.

Mutual Exclusion Locks

The operations on a mutex lock are as follows:
mutex_enter()		It acquires the lock.
mutex_exit()		It releases the lock. This action results in unblocking a waiting thread.
mutex_tryenter()	It acquires the lock if it is not already held.

Semaphores

The two operations that are possible with the semaphore are as follows:
wait	It waits for the semaphore integer to become 0.
signal	It increments the semaphore integer to 1 and accesses the critical section.

In Unix, operations involving semaphores are achieved by the following three system calls:
semget()	It initializes the semaphore set.
semctl()	It manages features of semaphores and their permissions.
semop()		It performs operations on semaphores.

Initializing semaphores

int semget(key_t key, int nsems, int semflg);

Brief description of the parameters used in the semget() function
Parameter	Description
key			It represents the access value associated with the semaphore ID.
nsems		It represents the numbers of elements stored in a semaphore array. A value 0 is passed for this argument if the exact size of the array is unknown.
semflg		It represents the initial access permissions and creation of control flags.

When successful, the function returns the value of the semaphore ID, semid.

Managing semaphores

int semctl(int semid, int semnum, int cmd, union semnum arg);

Brief description of the parameters used in the semctl() function
Parameter Description
Semid	It represents the semaphore ID.
Semnum	It represents a number to designate the semaphore in an array of semaphores.
Cmd		It represents the command that we wish to execute on the selected semaphore. The list of valid commands is as follows:
		GETVAL		It returns the value of a single semaphore.
		SETVAL		It sets the value of a single semaphore.
		GETPID		It returns the PID of the process that is operated on the semaphore.
		GETNCNT		It returns the number of the processes that are waiting for the semaphore value to become 1.
		GETALL		It returns the values for all the semaphores in a set.
		SETALL		It sets the values for all the semaphores in a set.
		IPC_STAT	It returns the status of the semaphore set.
		IPC_SET		It sets the user ID, group ID, and permissions.
		IPC_RMID	It removes the specifi ed semaphore set.
semnum	It indicates an optional argument that represents a union on the requested operation. The semnum union may appear in the following manner:
		union semnum
		{
			int val;
			struct semid_ds *buf;
			ushort *array;
		} smnm;

When successful, the semctl() system call executes the given command on the specified semaphore; otherwise, it returns −1.

Performing operations on semaphores

int semop(int semid, struct sembuf *sops, size_t nsops);

Brief description of the parameters used in the semop() function
Parameter Description
Semid	It represents the semaphore ID returned by the semget() call.
sops	It is a pointer to an array of semaphore operation structures. Each semaphore operation structure, sembuf, stores the operation that is to be performed on semaphores:
		struct sembuf
		{
			ushort_t sem_num; /* semaphore number */
			short sem_op; /* semaphore operation */
			short sem_flg; /* operation flags */
		};
		We can see that the structure includes the following:
		1. The semaphore number, sem_num
		2. A signed integer, sem_op, containing the operation that is to be performed on the semaphore
		3. The operation flags, sem_flg. 
		The two most commonly used operation flags are IPC_NOWAIT and SEM_UNDO.
		The IPC_NOWAIT flag is used to immediately return the function without changing the semaphore value.
		The SEM_UNDO flag is used to undo the semaphore operation if the process exits prematurely.
nsops	It represents the length of the array and indicates the maximum number of operations that are allowed in a semop() system call. Its default value is 10.

